CHAPTER I 

WELL, PRINCE, so Genoa and Lucca are now 
just family estates of the Buonapartes. But I 
warn you, if you don't tell me that this means 
war, if you still try to defend the infamies and 
horrors perpetrated by that Antichrist I real- 
ly believe he is Antichrist I will have nothing 
more to do with you and you are no longer my 
friend, no longer my 'faithful slave,' as you 
call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have 
frightened you sit down and tell me all the 
news." 

It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the 
well-known Anna Pdvlovna Sch^rer, maid of 
honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fe- 
dorovna. With these words she greeted Prince 
Vasili Kurdgin, a man of high rank and impor- 
tance, who was the first to arrive at her recep- 
tion. Anna Pdvlovna had had a cough for some 
days. She was, as she said, suffering from la 
grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. 
Petersburg, used only by the elite. 

All her invitations without exception, writ- 
ten in French, and delivered by a scarlet-liver- 
ied footman that morning, ran as follows: 

"If you have nothing better to do, Count [or 
Prince], and if the prospect of spending an 
evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible, 
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight be- 
tween 7 and 10 Annette Sch^rer." 

"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied 
the prince, not in the least disconcerted by this 
reception. He had just entered, wearing an em- 
broidered court uniform, knee breeches, and 
shoes, and had stars on his breast and a serene 
expression on his flat face. He spoke in that 
refined French in which our grandfathers not 
only spoke but thought, and with the gentle, 
patronizing intonation natural to a man of 
importance who had grown old in society and 
at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed 
her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, 
and shining head, and complacently seated 
himself on the sofa. 

"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you 



are. Set your friend's mind at rest," said he 
without altering his tone, beneath the polite- 
ness and affected sympathy of which indiffer- 
ence and even irony could be discerned. 

"Can one be well while suffering morally? 
Can one be calm in tirrfes like these if one has 
any feeling?" said Anna Pdvlovna. "You are 
staying the whole evening, I hope?" 

"And the fete at the English ambassador's? 
Today is Wednesday. I must put in an appear- 
ance there," said the prince. "My daughter is 
coming for me to take me there." 

"I thought today's fete had been canceled. 
I confess all these festivities and fireworks are 
becoming wearisome." 

"If they had known that you wished it, the 
entertainment would have been put off," said 
the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by 
force of habit said things he did not even wish 
to be believed. 

"Don't tease! Well, and what has been de- 
cided about Novosiltsev's dispatch? You know 
everything." 

"What can one say about it?" replied the 
prince in a cold, listless tone. "What has been 
decided? They have decided that Buonaparte 
has burnt his boats, and I believe that we are 
ready to burn ours." 

Prince Vastti always spoke languidly, like 
an actor repeating a stale part. Anna Pdvlovna 
Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years, 
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. 
To be an enthusiast had become her social vo- 
cation and, sometimes even when she did not 
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order 
not to disappoint the expectations of those 
who knew her. The subdued smile which, 
though it did not suit her faded features, al- 
ways played round her lips expressed, as in a 
spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her 
charming defect, which she neither wished, nor 
could, nor considered it necessary, to correct. 

In the midst of a conversation on political 
matters Anna Pdvlovna burst out: 

"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps 